internal_docs/01-strategic-planning/PHASE-5A-EXECUTION-CHECKLIST.md, before:

# PHASE 5A EXECUTION CHECKLIST

## Pre-Execution
- [ ] Read `PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md` (Tier 2 Guide)
- [ ] Understand success metrics
  - Zero OOM events under 5x load
  - Compression ≥2.0:1
  - Peak memory <95%
- [ ] Have sudo access or run as root (required for many steps)
- [ ] Required tools installed: `zramctl`, `systemctl`, `swapon`, `podman` or `docker` (verify with `which zramctl systemctl swapon podman || which docker`)
- [ ] Ensure available memory headroom before stress test: `free -h` (recommended: at least 2GB free / >20% available)
- [ ] Backup current configuration:
  ```bash
  mkdir -p /tmp/phase5a-backup
  cp /proc/sys/vm/swappiness /tmp/phase5a-backup/
  swapon --show > /tmp/phase5a-backup/swaps.txt
  ```
- [ ] Run preflight validation (recommended):
  ```bash
  sudo python3 scripts/validate-phase-5a.py
  ```


---

## Research-backed best practices (deep-research summary)

Highlights
- ✅ Prefer `zstd` compression where the kernel exposes it (best compression ratio; modern CPUs handle the CPU cost).
- ✅ Use `lz4` as a safe low-CPU fallback when `zstd` is unavailable.
- ✅ Default sizing heuristic: `min(ram / 2, 4GiB)` is safe for general-purpose hosts; increase only after staging tests.
- ✅ Raise `vm.swappiness` for zram (e.g., `180`) and set `vm.page-cluster = 0` to reduce clustered page I/O.

Platform & implementation notes
- Distro-native: prefer `zram-generator` (systemd generator) on Fedora/Arch when available — it runs at early-boot and is the upstream pattern used by Fedora/Arch. If unavailable, the `xnai-zram.service` wrapper is acceptable.
- Hibernation: zram-based swap does NOT support hibernation; document this as a known limitation.

Sizing heuristics (recommended defaults)
- RAM ≤ 4 GiB  -> zram-size = min(ram/2, 1 GiB)
- 4 GiB < RAM ≤ 16 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/2, 4 GiB)
- 16 GiB < RAM ≤ 64 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/4, 8 GiB)
- RAM > 64 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/8, 16 GiB)

Compression algorithm & streams
- Prefer `zstd(level=3)` for compression/CPU balance. If kernel lacks `zstd`, fall back to `lz4`.
- Set `streams` ≈ number of physical/available CPUs (use `nproc --ignore=1` for safety in small VMs).
- Use `zramctl --algorithm zstd --streams $(nproc)` or `zram-generator` `compression-algorithm` entry.

Kernel tuning rationale
- `vm.swappiness = 180` encourages earlier pageout to zram (recommended by ArchWiki / Pop!_OS / Fedora findings).
- `vm.page-cluster = 0` avoids large clustered reads/writes and improves responsiveness for in‑RAM swap.

Stress-testing & safety
- Use `stress-ng` with staged ramps and `--backoff`/`--verify` options (avoid `--pathological`).
- Keep safety thresholds in staged runs (abort on CPU >85% or MEM > 92%).
- In CI, run `validate-phase-5a.py` in a containerized environment with mocked `/proc` values; full integration tests require privileged runners or QEMU VM images.

CPU affinity & core isolation (actionable checklist)
- [ ] Reserve isolated cores for latency-sensitive workloads (document `isolcpus=` or chosen core set).
- [ ] Add `CPUAffinity` to systemd unit templates for critical services (example: `CPUAffinity=2 3 4 5`).
- [ ] Pin model-serving containers with `--cpuset-cpus` where needed.
- [ ] Configure `zram.streams` to avoid the isolated core set.
- [ ] Configure IRQ pinning for NVMe/IO to non-isolated cores.
- [ ] Add Grafana panels for per-core usage and IRQ distribution; add alert when isolated-core usage > 70%.

Observability (Prometheus + node_exporter)
- Health-check script should write Prometheus metrics to `node_exporter` textfile collector directory (e.g., `/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/xnai_zram.prom`).
- Recommended metric names (gauge):
  - `xnai_zram_compression_ratio` (float)
  - `xnai_zram_used_bytes` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_uncompressed_bytes_total` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_streams` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_algorithm{alg="zstd"}` (label)
- Ensure metrics file ends with a newline and is owned/readable by `node_exporter`.

Operational & CI recommendations
- Add unit tests for `validate-phase-5a.py` and `zram-health-check.sh` (mock `/proc` and `zramctl` outputs).
- Add an integration job that runs `phase-5a-stress-test.py --staging` on a privileged runner or ephemeral VM image (gated behind manual approval).
- Implement an automatic rollback script (`scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh`) that reverses sysctl, stops/ disables the service and restores backups.

References
- ArchWiki — zram: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Zram
- Fedora — SwapOnZRAM: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/SwapOnZRAM
- util-linux `zramctl` manpage: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/zramctl.8.html
- stress-ng manpage: https://manpages.debian.org/stretch/stress-ng/stress-ng.1.en.html
- psutil docs (monitoring): https://psutil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

---

## Task 5A.1: Collect Baseline (30 minutes)

**Objective**: Capture system state before modifications

### Checklist
- [ ] Create baseline directory: `mkdir -p /tmp/phase5a-baseline`
- [ ] Run baseline collection script:
  ```bash
  scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --baseline-only
  # Or manually:
  free -h > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/memory-start.txt
  sysctl vm.swappiness vm.page-cluster > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/kernel-params-start.txt
  dmesg | tail -20 > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/dmesg-start.txt
  ```
- [ ] Record baseline metrics:
  - Physical RAM: _____ GB
  - Available: _____ MB
  - Current swappiness: _____
  - Current zRAM: _____ (active/not active)
  - OOM events (24h): _____

### Success Criteria
- [ ] Baseline data saved to `/tmp/phase5a-baseline/`
- [ ] Current kernel parameters documented
- [ ] Memory state captured

---

## Task 5A.2: Apply Kernel Parameters (15 minutes)

**Objective**: Configure kernel for zRAM optimization

### Checklist
- [ ] Create `/etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf`:
  ```bash
  sudo cp TEMPLATE-sysctl-zram-tuning.conf /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ```
- [ ] Apply configuration:
  ```bash
  sudo sysctl -p /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ```
- [ ] Verify each parameter:
  - [ ] `vm.swappiness = 180`: `cat /proc/sys/vm/swappiness | grep 180`
  - [ ] `vm.page-cluster = 0`: `cat /proc/sys/vm/page-cluster | grep 0`
  - [ ] `vm.watermark_boost_factor = 0`: `sysctl vm.watermark_boost_factor | grep 0`

### Success Criteria
- [ ] All 5 kernel parameters set to target values
- [ ] No errors in sysctl output
- [ ] Parameters readable via `/proc/sys/`

---

## Task 5A.3: Configure zRAM Device (20 minutes)

**Objective**: Create and activate zRAM swap device

### Checklist
- [ ] Verify zramctl is installed:
  ```bash
  which zramctl || sudo apt install util-linux
  ```
- [ ] Create systemd service:
  ```bash
  sudo cp TEMPLATE-xnai-zram.service /etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service
  ```
- [ ] Enable and start service:
  ```bash
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable xnai-zram.service
  sudo systemctl start xnai-zram.service
  ```
- [ ] Verify zRAM active:
  - [ ] `zramctl` shows zram0
  - [ ] Algorithm is zstd
  - [ ] `swapon --show` includes /dev/zram0
  - [ ] `systemctl status xnai-zram.service` shows active

### Success Criteria
- [ ] `/dev/zram0` active with 4GB size
- [ ] zstd compression confirmed
- [ ] Systemd service enabled and running
- [ ] Swap configuration includes zram0

---

## Task 5A.4: Execute Stress Test (45 minutes)

**Objective**: Validate zero OOM events under 5x load

### Checklist
- [ ] Prepare stress test (default: staging/ramp):
  ```bash
  # Staging (recommended): incremental ramp, safer defaults
  python scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --staging --duration 600 --workers 5

  # Production intensity (ONLY with approval):
  python scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --confirm-prod --duration 600 --workers 5
  ```
- [ ] Monitor during test (separate terminal):
  ```bash
  watch -n 2 'zramctl && echo "" && free -h'
  ```
- [ ] Record results:
  - OOM events: _____
  - Compression ratio: _____ : 1
  - Peak memory %: _____
  - System responsiveness: _____

### Success Criteria - CRITICAL
- [ ] ✅ Zero OOM killer invocations
- [ ] ✅ Compression ratio ≥1.5:1 (target ≥2.0)
- [ ] ✅ Peak memory <95%
- [ ] ✅ System remains responsive (no hangs)

**If FAILED**: Skip Task 5A.5 and run rollback (see PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md section 7)

- Run Ansible rollback (recommended for fleets):
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook ansible/playbooks/phase5a_rollback.yml -i inventory --limit <host>
  ```
- Or run the script locally:
  ```bash
  sudo scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh
  ```

---

## Task 5A.5: Production Deployment (15 minutes)

**Objective**: Make configuration persistent and document

### Checklist
- [ ] Verify persistence:
  ```bash
  ls -la /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ls -la /etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service
  systemctl is-enabled xnai-zram.service | grep enabled
  ```
- [ ] Create team documentation:
  ```bash
  cat > memory_bank/PHASE-5A-DEPLOYED.md << 'EOF'
  # Phase 5A Deployed: 2026-02-12
  
  ## Configuration
  - Kernel parameters: Applied via `/etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf`
  - zRAM service: `/etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service`
  - Status: Active and persistent
  
  ## Monitoring
  - Daily check: `./scripts/zram-health-check.sh`
  - Real-time: `watch zramctl`
  - Logs: `journalctl -u xnai-zram.service -f`
  
  ## Rollback
  See PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md section 7
  EOF
  ```

**How metrics flow (host-level)**

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  K[Linux kernel (zram driver)] --> Z[zramctl]
  Z --> H[scripts/zram-health-check.sh]
  H --> TF[/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/xnai_zram.prom]
  NE[node_exporter:9100] --> TF
  Prom[Prometheus:9090] --> NE
  Graf[Grafana] --> Prom
  Caddy[Caddy (app proxy):8000] --> App[RAG API & Services]
```

> Note: zRAM and the health-check must run on the host kernel (not inside Podman). Prometheus scrapes `node_exporter` directly on port `9100`; Caddy (port 8000) is not used for metrics scraping.

- [ ] Create health check script:
  ```bash
  chmod +x scripts/zram-health-check.sh
  ./scripts/zram-health-check.sh  # First run
  ```
- [ ] Team briefing document created
- [ ] All documentation updated

### Success Criteria
- [ ] Configuration files in `/etc/` 
- [ ] Systemd service enabled
- [ ] Documentation complete
- [ ] Team briefed
- [ ] Monitoring script ready
- [ ] `scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh` created, executable, and tested (run in staging)
- [ ] Prometheus scraping `xnai_zram_*` metrics (see `monitoring/prometheus/phase-5a-scrape.yml`)
- [ ] Add Prometheus alert rules: `monitoring/prometheus/rules/phase-5a-alerts.yml` → include in your `prometheus.yml` `rule_files:` and reload Prometheus
- [ ] Grafana dashboard imported (`monitoring/grafana/dashboards/xnai_zram_dashboard.json`) and panels show live data

---

## Phase 5A Validation (Post-Deployment)

### Run Final Validation
```bash
python scripts/validate-phase-5a.py
```

Should show:
```
✅ 1. zRAM Device Active
✅ 2. zRAM Algorithm = zstd
✅ 3. vm.swappiness = 180
✅ 4. vm.page-cluster = 0
✅ 5. Swap Configured
✅ 6. Systemd Service Exists
✅ 7. Systemd Service Enabled
✅ 8. Systemd Service Active
✅ 9. Sysctl Config Persistent
✅ 10. No Recent OOM Events

🎉 Phase 5A validation PASSED!
```

---

## Optional: Test Persistence (Reboot)

### Before Reboot
```bash
zramctl > /tmp/zram-pre.txt
sysctl vm.swappiness > /tmp/swappiness-pre.txt
```

### Reboot
```bash
sudo reboot
```

### After Reboot
```bash
# Verify persistence
zramctl > /tmp/zram-post.txt
diff /tmp/zram-pre.txt /tmp/zram-post.txt  # Should be identical

# Verify kernel params
sysctl vm.swappiness  # Should be 180

# Check service
systemctl status xnai-zram.service  # Should be active
```

---

## Troubleshooting During Execution

### If OOM events occur during stress test:
```bash
# Stop test immediately
pkill -9 python

# Check what was OOM killed
dmesg | grep "Out of memory" | tail -5

# Options:
# 1. Increase zRAM size to 6GB
# 2. Reduce container limits
# 3. Run rollback and retry (see PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md)
```

### If stress test hangs:
```bash
# In another terminal
pkill -9 python
# Or kill the entire terminal session and try again
```

### If kernel parameters won't apply:
```bash
# Requires sudo
sudo sysctl -w vm.swappiness=180

# Check kernel version (need 5.10+)
uname -r
```

---

## Sign-Off

- [ ] Task 5A.1 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.2 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.3 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.4 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.5 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Validation Passed: _____________ Date: _______

**Phase 5A Status**: 
- [ ] ✅ COMPLETE AND VALIDATED
- [ ] ⏳ IN PROGRESS
- [ ] ❌ FAILED - Rollback executed

**Notes**:
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________

---

## Next: Phase 5B

**Phase 5B**: Observable Stack (Prometheus + Grafana + OpenTelemetry)
- Start immediately (no blockers after Phase 5A)
- See: `PHASE-5B-OBSERVABLE-FOUNDATION.md` (when available)

---

**Execution Guide**: Phase 5A Memory Optimization  
**Version**: Tier 3 Implementation Module  
**Created**: 2026-02-12  
**Status**: Ready for Execution

Commit message:

ci(phase5a): run Phase-5A unit tests in smoke CI and privileged integration; update checklist

internal_docs/01-strategic-planning/PHASE-5A-EXECUTION-CHECKLIST.md, after:

# PHASE 5A EXECUTION CHECKLIST

## Pre-Execution
- [ ] Read `PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md` (Tier 2 Guide)
- [ ] Understand success metrics
  - Zero OOM events under 5x load
  - Compression ≥2.0:1
  - Peak memory <95%
- [ ] Have sudo access or run as root (required for many steps)
- [ ] Required tools installed: `zramctl`, `systemctl`, `swapon`, `podman` or `docker` (verify with `which zramctl systemctl swapon podman || which docker`)
- [ ] Ensure available memory headroom before stress test: `free -h` (recommended: at least 2GB free / >20% available)
- [ ] Backup current configuration:
  ```bash
  mkdir -p /tmp/phase5a-backup
  cp /proc/sys/vm/swappiness /tmp/phase5a-backup/
  swapon --show > /tmp/phase5a-backup/swaps.txt
  ```
- [ ] Run preflight validation (recommended):
  ```bash
  sudo python3 scripts/validate-phase-5a.py
  ```


---

## Research-backed best practices (deep-research summary)

Highlights
- ✅ Prefer `zstd` compression where the kernel exposes it (best compression ratio; modern CPUs handle the CPU cost).
- ✅ Use `lz4` as a safe low-CPU fallback when `zstd` is unavailable.
- ✅ Default sizing heuristic: `min(ram / 2, 4GiB)` is safe for general-purpose hosts; increase only after staging tests.
- ✅ Raise `vm.swappiness` for zram (e.g., `180`) and set `vm.page-cluster = 0` to reduce clustered page I/O.

Platform & implementation notes
- Distro-native: prefer `zram-generator` (systemd generator) on Fedora/Arch when available — it runs at early-boot and is the upstream pattern used by Fedora/Arch. If unavailable, the `xnai-zram.service` wrapper is acceptable.
- Hibernation: zram-based swap does NOT support hibernation; document this as a known limitation.

Sizing heuristics (recommended defaults)
- RAM ≤ 4 GiB  -> zram-size = min(ram/2, 1 GiB)
- 4 GiB < RAM ≤ 16 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/2, 4 GiB)
- 16 GiB < RAM ≤ 64 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/4, 8 GiB)
- RAM > 64 GiB -> zram-size = min(ram/8, 16 GiB)

Compression algorithm & streams
- Prefer `zstd(level=3)` for compression/CPU balance. If kernel lacks `zstd`, fall back to `lz4`.
- Set `streams` ≈ number of physical/available CPUs (use `nproc --ignore=1` for safety in small VMs).
- Use `zramctl --algorithm zstd --streams $(nproc)` or `zram-generator` `compression-algorithm` entry.

Kernel tuning rationale
- `vm.swappiness = 180` encourages earlier pageout to zram (recommended by ArchWiki / Pop!_OS / Fedora findings).
- `vm.page-cluster = 0` avoids large clustered reads/writes and improves responsiveness for in‑RAM swap.

Stress-testing & safety
- Use `stress-ng` with staged ramps and `--backoff`/`--verify` options (avoid `--pathological`).
- Keep safety thresholds in staged runs (abort on CPU >85% or MEM > 92%).
- In CI, run `validate-phase-5a.py` in a containerized environment with mocked `/proc` values; full integration tests require privileged runners or QEMU VM images.

CPU affinity & core isolation (actionable checklist)
- [ ] Reserve isolated cores for latency-sensitive workloads (document `isolcpus=` or chosen core set).
- [ ] Add `CPUAffinity` to systemd unit templates for critical services (example: `CPUAffinity=2 3 4 5`).
- [ ] Pin model-serving containers with `--cpuset-cpus` where needed.
- [ ] Configure `zram.streams` to avoid the isolated core set.
- [ ] Configure IRQ pinning for NVMe/IO to non-isolated cores.
- [ ] Add Grafana panels for per-core usage and IRQ distribution; add alert when isolated-core usage > 70%.

Observability (Prometheus + node_exporter)
- Health-check script should write Prometheus metrics to `node_exporter` textfile collector directory (e.g., `/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/xnai_zram.prom`).
- Recommended metric names (gauge):
  - `xnai_zram_compression_ratio` (float)
  - `xnai_zram_used_bytes` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_uncompressed_bytes_total` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_streams` (gauge)
  - `xnai_zram_algorithm{alg="zstd"}` (label)
- Ensure metrics file ends with a newline and is owned/readable by `node_exporter`.

Operational & CI recommendations
- Add unit tests for `validate-phase-5a.py` and `zram-health-check.sh` (mock `/proc` and `zramctl` outputs). The `scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh` now has a unit test (`tests/test_phase5a_rollback.py`) and is validated by CI.
- CI coverage:
  - `python-3.12-smoke.yml` runs Phase‑5A unit tests on PRs and pushes (non-blocking).
  - `phase5a-integration.yml` runs Phase‑5A unit tests on the privileged staging runner (blocking for the staging job).
- Add an integration job that runs `phase-5a-stress-test.py --staging` on a privileged runner or ephemeral VM image (gated behind manual approval).
- Implement an automatic rollback script (`scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh`) that reverses sysctl, stops/ disables the service and restores backups. The rollback operation can be executed via `ansible/playbooks/phase5a_rollback.yml`.

References
- ArchWiki — zram: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Zram
- Fedora — SwapOnZRAM: https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Changes/SwapOnZRAM
- util-linux `zramctl` manpage: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/zramctl.8.html
- stress-ng manpage: https://manpages.debian.org/stretch/stress-ng/stress-ng.1.en.html
- psutil docs (monitoring): https://psutil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

---

## Task 5A.1: Collect Baseline (30 minutes)

**Objective**: Capture system state before modifications

### Checklist
- [ ] Create baseline directory: `mkdir -p /tmp/phase5a-baseline`
- [ ] Run baseline collection script:
  ```bash
  scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --baseline-only
  # Or manually:
  free -h > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/memory-start.txt
  sysctl vm.swappiness vm.page-cluster > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/kernel-params-start.txt
  dmesg | tail -20 > /tmp/phase5a-baseline/dmesg-start.txt
  ```
- [ ] Record baseline metrics:
  - Physical RAM: _____ GB
  - Available: _____ MB
  - Current swappiness: _____
  - Current zRAM: _____ (active/not active)
  - OOM events (24h): _____

### Success Criteria
- [ ] Baseline data saved to `/tmp/phase5a-baseline/`
- [ ] Current kernel parameters documented
- [ ] Memory state captured

---

## Task 5A.2: Apply Kernel Parameters (15 minutes)

**Objective**: Configure kernel for zRAM optimization

### Checklist
- [ ] Create `/etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf`:
  ```bash
  sudo cp TEMPLATE-sysctl-zram-tuning.conf /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ```
- [ ] Apply configuration:
  ```bash
  sudo sysctl -p /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ```
- [ ] Verify each parameter:
  - [ ] `vm.swappiness = 180`: `cat /proc/sys/vm/swappiness | grep 180`
  - [ ] `vm.page-cluster = 0`: `cat /proc/sys/vm/page-cluster | grep 0`
  - [ ] `vm.watermark_boost_factor = 0`: `sysctl vm.watermark_boost_factor | grep 0`

### Success Criteria
- [ ] All 5 kernel parameters set to target values
- [ ] No errors in sysctl output
- [ ] Parameters readable via `/proc/sys/`

---

## Task 5A.3: Configure zRAM Device (20 minutes)

**Objective**: Create and activate zRAM swap device

### Checklist
- [ ] Verify zramctl is installed:
  ```bash
  which zramctl || sudo apt install util-linux
  ```
- [ ] Create systemd service:
  ```bash
  sudo cp TEMPLATE-xnai-zram.service /etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service
  ```
- [ ] Enable and start service:
  ```bash
  sudo systemctl daemon-reload
  sudo systemctl enable xnai-zram.service
  sudo systemctl start xnai-zram.service
  ```
- [ ] Verify zRAM active:
  - [ ] `zramctl` shows zram0
  - [ ] Algorithm is zstd
  - [ ] `swapon --show` includes /dev/zram0
  - [ ] `systemctl status xnai-zram.service` shows active

### Success Criteria
- [ ] `/dev/zram0` active with 4GB size
- [ ] zstd compression confirmed
- [ ] Systemd service enabled and running
- [ ] Swap configuration includes zram0

---

## Task 5A.4: Execute Stress Test (45 minutes)

**Objective**: Validate zero OOM events under 5x load

### Checklist
- [ ] Prepare stress test (default: staging/ramp):
  ```bash
  # Staging (recommended): incremental ramp, safer defaults
  python scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --staging --duration 600 --workers 5

  # Production intensity (ONLY with approval):
  python scripts/phase-5a-stress-test.py --confirm-prod --duration 600 --workers 5
  ```
- [ ] Monitor during test (separate terminal):
  ```bash
  watch -n 2 'zramctl && echo "" && free -h'
  ```
- [ ] Record results:
  - OOM events: _____
  - Compression ratio: _____ : 1
  - Peak memory %: _____
  - System responsiveness: _____

### Success Criteria - CRITICAL
- [ ] ✅ Zero OOM killer invocations
- [ ] ✅ Compression ratio ≥1.5:1 (target ≥2.0)
- [ ] ✅ Peak memory <95%
- [ ] ✅ System remains responsive (no hangs)

**If FAILED**: Skip Task 5A.5 and run rollback (see PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md section 7)

- Run Ansible rollback (recommended for fleets):
  ```bash
  ansible-playbook ansible/playbooks/phase5a_rollback.yml -i inventory --limit <host>
  ```
- Or run the script locally:
  ```bash
  sudo scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh
  ```

---

## Task 5A.5: Production Deployment (15 minutes)

**Objective**: Make configuration persistent and document

### Checklist
- [ ] Verify persistence:
  ```bash
  ls -la /etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf
  ls -la /etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service
  systemctl is-enabled xnai-zram.service | grep enabled
  ```
- [ ] Create team documentation:
  ```bash
  cat > memory_bank/PHASE-5A-DEPLOYED.md << 'EOF'
  # Phase 5A Deployed: 2026-02-12
  
  ## Configuration
  - Kernel parameters: Applied via `/etc/sysctl.d/99-xnai-zram-tuning.conf`
  - zRAM service: `/etc/systemd/system/xnai-zram.service`
  - Status: Active and persistent
  
  ## Monitoring
  - Daily check: `./scripts/zram-health-check.sh`
  - Real-time: `watch zramctl`
  - Logs: `journalctl -u xnai-zram.service -f`
  
  ## Rollback
  See PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md section 7
  EOF
  ```

**How metrics flow (host-level)**

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  K[Linux kernel (zram driver)] --> Z[zramctl]
  Z --> H[scripts/zram-health-check.sh]
  H --> TF[/var/lib/node_exporter/textfile_collector/xnai_zram.prom]
  NE[node_exporter:9100] --> TF
  Prom[Prometheus:9090] --> NE
  Graf[Grafana] --> Prom
  Caddy[Caddy (app proxy):8000] --> App[RAG API & Services]
```

> Note: zRAM and the health-check must run on the host kernel (not inside Podman). Prometheus scrapes `node_exporter` directly on port `9100`; Caddy (port 8000) is not used for metrics scraping.

- [ ] Create health check script:
  ```bash
  chmod +x scripts/zram-health-check.sh
  ./scripts/zram-health-check.sh  # First run
  ```
- [ ] Team briefing document created
- [ ] All documentation updated

### Success Criteria
- [ ] Configuration files in `/etc/` 
- [ ] Systemd service enabled
- [ ] Documentation complete
- [ ] Team briefed
- [ ] Monitoring script ready
- [ ] `scripts/phase5a-rollback.sh` created, executable, and tested (run in staging)
- [ ] Prometheus scraping `xnai_zram_*` metrics (see `monitoring/prometheus/phase-5a-scrape.yml`)
- [ ] Add Prometheus alert rules: `monitoring/prometheus/rules/phase-5a-alerts.yml` → include in your `prometheus.yml` `rule_files:` and reload Prometheus
- [ ] Grafana dashboard imported (`monitoring/grafana/dashboards/xnai_zram_dashboard.json`) and panels show live data

---

## Phase 5A Validation (Post-Deployment)

### Run Final Validation
```bash
python scripts/validate-phase-5a.py
```

Should show:
```
✅ 1. zRAM Device Active
✅ 2. zRAM Algorithm = zstd
✅ 3. vm.swappiness = 180
✅ 4. vm.page-cluster = 0
✅ 5. Swap Configured
✅ 6. Systemd Service Exists
✅ 7. Systemd Service Enabled
✅ 8. Systemd Service Active
✅ 9. Sysctl Config Persistent
✅ 10. No Recent OOM Events

🎉 Phase 5A validation PASSED!
```

---

## Optional: Test Persistence (Reboot)

### Before Reboot
```bash
zramctl > /tmp/zram-pre.txt
sysctl vm.swappiness > /tmp/swappiness-pre.txt
```

### Reboot
```bash
sudo reboot
```

### After Reboot
```bash
# Verify persistence
zramctl > /tmp/zram-post.txt
diff /tmp/zram-pre.txt /tmp/zram-post.txt  # Should be identical

# Verify kernel params
sysctl vm.swappiness  # Should be 180

# Check service
systemctl status xnai-zram.service  # Should be active
```

---

## Troubleshooting During Execution

### If OOM events occur during stress test:
```bash
# Stop test immediately
pkill -9 python

# Check what was OOM killed
dmesg | grep "Out of memory" | tail -5

# Options:
# 1. Increase zRAM size to 6GB
# 2. Reduce container limits
# 3. Run rollback and retry (see PHASE-5A-MEMORY-OPTIMIZATION.md)
```

### If stress test hangs:
```bash
# In another terminal
pkill -9 python
# Or kill the entire terminal session and try again
```

### If kernel parameters won't apply:
```bash
# Requires sudo
sudo sysctl -w vm.swappiness=180

# Check kernel version (need 5.10+)
uname -r
```

---

## Sign-Off

- [ ] Task 5A.1 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.2 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.3 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.4 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Task 5A.5 Complete: _____________ Date: _______
- [ ] Validation Passed: _____________ Date: _______

**Phase 5A Status**: 
- [ ] ✅ COMPLETE AND VALIDATED
- [ ] ⏳ IN PROGRESS
- [ ] ❌ FAILED - Rollback executed

**Notes**:
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________

---

## Next: Phase 5B

**Phase 5B**: Observable Stack (Prometheus + Grafana + OpenTelemetry)
- Start immediately (no blockers after Phase 5A)
- See: `PHASE-5B-OBSERVABLE-FOUNDATION.md` (when available)

---

**Execution Guide**: Phase 5A Memory Optimization  
**Version**: Tier 3 Implementation Module  
**Created**: 2026-02-12  
**Status**: Ready for Execution
